I
here you go
now
good evening everyone uh the Clover
School District Board of Trustees
welcomed you to tonight's monthly
business meeting CSD board meets
formally twice a month on the second and
fourth Monday one work Session One board
meeting business meeting format is as
follows the board will follow its
approved agenda during public forum
attendees elected to speak have three
minutes the board chair will address all
speakers to provide the rules of public
form following public form the meeting
will continue with the remaining
presentations on the agenda following
each presentation the board will have
the opportunity to ask questions before
moving to the
next I would everyone please stand for
the pledge of allegiance to be followed
by the
invocation
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one nation
under God indivisible with liy and
justice for all let us
pray dear Lord in this season of giving
thanks and reflecting on a year of great
blessings and success we offer gratitude
for our talented students who remain our
focus and our mission we are grateful
for our outstanding teachers and staff
whose hard work and dedication are the
reason our students are able to excel in
so many ways we are grateful for our
district leadership whose vision and
commitment to Excellence means our
future is bright we are grateful for our
parents and Community whose support is
invaluable we are grateful Lord we ask
for your guidance and all we say and do
here this evening thank you for the
opportunity to participate in this work
for the benefit of our district in your
name we pray amen
amen without without objection the board
will approve the agenda for tonight's
meeting uh seeing none agenda is
approved uh without objection the board
will approve am minutes from the last
meeting seeing none uh minutes are
approved uh without objection the board
will approve uh personnel as presented
an executive
session hearing none uh
Personnel is approved uh Dr Quinn uh
special recognitions all right good
evening everyone it's great to see
everyone here in person and we also want
to welcome those members who are join
joining us via our YouTube channel uh I
want to add with Miss marah that this is
the holiday season and there's so much
to be grateful for and so many people
that we're proud of and tonight we're
going to begin with recognizing just a
few of those people that we're extremely
proud of we're going to start out with
Miss Patrice green our clover High
School assistant principal let's ask her
to come
forward we would like to recognize Miss
Patrice green she is in her fourth year
as assistant principal of clover high
school and was recently named as a
finalist for the 2024 scasa assistant
principal of the Year award which is the
highest honor for a school administrator
in the state congratulations to Miss
Patrice
[Applause]
green
and if you try to follow her around the
high school you better put your skates
on CU she is a
mover next up we have a host of awards
for our clover High School football
postseason uh and we are just so proud
of of the blue eagles and how they
performed this year uh so next up Clover
High School varsity football team
members received numerous postseason
Awards after claiming the Region 3 5A
title so we'll start with the first one
Mr Landon Stone would you come forward
Landon Landon was named the Region 3
five a offensive player of the year
following an outstanding season the
junior running back ran for
2,254 yards and scored 21 touchdowns
this season he added 109 yards and two
receiving touchdowns as well and he was
absolutely fun to watch congratulations
[Applause]
Landon next up is Jaden Bryant Jaden if
you'll come forward Jaden was named the
region 3A 5A Defensive Player of the
Year as the senior he led the tough Blue
Eagle defense Jaden accumulated 97
tackles this season 14 sacks 11 and a
half tackles for a loss while facing for
excuse me forcing two fumbles and
receiving one jadden
[Applause]
Bryant next up Clover High School
defensive coordinator Steven peer was
was named the South Carolina football
coaches association Upper State
assistant coach of the
year you can go ahead and clap for that
that's well
deserved coach peer's defense dominated
region play and allowed just 5.6 points
per game with three shutouts against
region opponents he is almost as intense
to watch on the sidelines as his players
are
congratulations
and last but certainly not least in his
first year as the head coach of clover
High School varsity football program
Perry wilbri was named the Region 3 5A
coach of the year you can go ahead and
clap for that one
too coach wilright led the Clover High
LED Clover High School to its fifth
region title in school history as the
team rallied after dropping the first
two games of the season to win nine
straight games congratulations to coach
wbite and all of these deserving honores
[Applause]
tonight and in this season of um
football controversy with college it's
nice to be celebrating some good high
school football
results uh anyone who wants to go back
to their house and not listen to us to
the rest of the day is welcome to leave
now's a good time to leave just kidding
now's a good time to leave if you don't
want to stay for the whole
[Laughter]
meeting public
forum after we always do after
yeah thank you for being
here Mr Dylan do we have anyone signed
up for public form yes sir all
right Dr Quinn as they leave the
superintendent's report okay so uh we
have three presentations tonight for the
superintendent's report we're going to
begin with the easy one uh we have been
working on policies with Dr Hemingway uh
we have one policy left for second
reading so Dr Hemingway I believe there
might have been a minor change from
first reading to Second reading so I'll
let you have the floor all right thank
you good evening Dr Quinn and members of
the board tonight I'm reviewing for
second reading two policies Gavin's law
which is a South car law for sexual EXT
extortion and uh in the previous
readings of this uh of this policy we
discussed several things which included
uh the changes that were being made to
it as well as definitions and and
specific terms related to Gavin's law we
talked about what uh the consequences
would be and what the uh classifications
for the law will be one of the things
that we added to this law was the
wording in compliance with state law so
that it's not directly the board that's
imposing these consequences but we are
following state law uh as a result of
the law that was changed for sexual
extortion and so um these changes have
been made as you'll see reflected in
your your board packet we also discussed
how we would notify students and parents
as well um contractors and other
visitors who come to our district about
the
law and so as and then the other part
was the reporting of it uh if someone in
the district recognizes or comes to
knowledge that there has been sexual
extortion how they would get that
information to District leaders and then
what the discipline U codes we would
follow for it are there any questions
for gav
law any questions
okay uh without objection board will
approve
uh uh uh for the second reading j i CFB
and
gbbe on Gavin's
law hearing none uh those two are
approved thank you all right now for the
happy news of the night uh we have been
hard at work with our architectural font
firm and and with our civil engineering
firm uh working on designs for our
second high school we have finalized all
of those and so in curriculum when we
are building curriculum we like to begin
with the end in mind so today we want to
show you where we want to be with this
second high school and so I'm going to
ask Ben Thompson and his team members to
come forward at this time to share where
we are with the second High
School
even it's
coming micophone
one more time use
the anything okay
gotcha great good to be with you again
um uh it is it's a pleasure to be with
you uh for for this uh purpose
specifically uh because we've been over
the last several uh really months uh
getting closer and closer to uh a
tremendous milestone for this project
and and that's a that's a point in which
we get to actually see it coming out of
the ground so uh we're not quite there
yet we'll talk about that uh this
evening but uh glad to be with you to
share um the as we as we look towards
the the completion of the project uh
with me tonight from our firm is Alex
Lei Alex is the project architect uh for
for this facility I function as the
principal in charge and and again
Michael chuning who most of you have met
as well as the project manager amongst
the engineers the the the multitude of
Engineers and uh staff that we've been
uh dedica to this project over the last
uh really two years so good to be with
you um
tonight uh we wanted to to to kind of go
back um and and look at how this project
developed uh overall not in an effort to
um to change it or or talk talk more
about it than than necessary but to
remind the board kind of How Far We've
Come uh from from the Inception of this
project all the way to the all the way
to uh all the way to today um we first
started with asking a lot of questions
uh of not only your leadership but also
your Educators your staff uh everyone
here at the district about what makes
this project special what makes this
place uh special and that uh environment
makes a big difference when you start uh
and into the design uh process we found
uh this area this County um with a lot
of natural resources of course but uh
also a lot a connection to the out to
the outside world um and and very active
uh and robust in the way that um that
that citizens here approach how they
live and work and uh play in in your
county so that was important to us as we
began to kind of formulate the the
design uh because it really affects how
you how you look at uh children and how
you look at teaching um in a very
specific Community uh like here uh in
for Clover School District so the way
that affects um uh education today is uh
that that it really focuses on projects
it really focuses on activities not
sitting in in rows upon rows uh like
like we're used to dealing with but
actually getting in there uh and doing
the work uh together um uh based on your
curriculum overall so we really had the
chance at the very beginning of this
project to make sure that we were
fine-tuned to what makes Clover School
District um Clover School District uh
and made sure that your curriculum was
in inserted into the design of space
into the design uh of a building overall
so we're proud to be here with you
tonight to at least show you a little
bit about how that's uh developed over
time um right when we began it's it's
really about the the the outcome uh that
Dr Quinn mentioned is what do we want
this facility uh to eventually become uh
and so we went through an extensive uh
work session with many of your Educators
to really understand what they wanted
that not not uh not only did they how
they wanted it to feel but but also how
do they want it to work
uh kind of overall so you'll see uh
several design goals we went through a a
good a good uh number of work sessions
to to kind of get there as far as what
your outcomes uh were going to be at the
end of the day um overall and I'll just
kind of explain this as uh what that uh
big those big Ideas uh were really as we
began thinking about how do we take that
sense of community and context into into
the building and really focus it on how
you want to use uh that High School is
how do you form the spaces so uh really
um anywhere from more than 2,000
students in any any given place is kind
of a scary uh thought sometimes but how
do you break that apart how do you break
that into areas in which you can um
really manage uh the the day-to-day
operations of a high school so uh as we
thought about it at the very beginning
was breaking that uh into three academic
houses one for freshmen or new students
uh that are coming to the campus and and
two uh academic houses for 10th 11th and
12th grade uh overall in in the facility
you can see on the screen um those
houses represented by the dark lines and
then the the yellow box representing
that what makes uh each one of those
houses unique a a real Gathering space
uh inside of each one of those houses
for any number of activities uh kind of
overall the big idea also is about
relating how uh kids move and travel uh
during their day what spaces get used
for small functions what spaces get used
for for large activities of kind of
overall so as we began to kind of piece
this building together uh you can see uh
that all of the core areas really uh
evolve revolve around the the
interaction of students on a day-to-day
basis Safety and Security was a big
issue here we wanted to make sure
everybody had Clear View about what was
going on in the academic day we wanted
to make sure that they had every
opportunity available to them on the
inside and the outside uh for for
learning activities uh kind of overall
so just those little diagrams uh uh that
we started with began to form what
turned into uh the development of that
uh building overall here uh first floor
plan uh kind of hard to to see but uh
bottom of the screen is an arrow that
Pro points towards the the front door um
there and right where that number one is
is that is that new front door is the is
the administration uh area uh the um the
academic Wings on the right and left of
that uh number one so four three and and
two really represent the academic areas
uh kind of over overall to the left of
the screen you can see many of the
athletic uh and arts uh areas of the
facility uh and towards the back of the
building the dining room uh which is
number six and um and the theater right
there in the center behind the
administrative uh areas this is a
multi-story uh building so ground floor
leads you to the to the second floor um
uh Freshman Academy um uh is number four
on the bottom of the screen it is a
two-story um um floor plan uh on the
right hand side of the screen are 10th
through 12th grade academics they are
also on the second floor and extend to
the uh third floor right there in the
center on this diagram on this uh
depiction uh is that Media Center it
sits right on top uh overlooking the
front uh entry of of this this facility
uh and as I mentioned uh the third floor
is 10th through 12th grade academics on
the right hand side uh of this of this
facility um kind of overall um looking
through we wanted to just go through a
academic area with you to kind of show
how those initial uh conversations with
users and teachers and and your
leadership as well kind of vetted itself
out in the design uh of the building so
I'll let Alex kind of walk through um
that kind of overall if um if the the
yellow areas are obviously how you
circulate with inside of that academic
area um and you can see the two big
areas on the perimeter of this uh
academic Wing as as kind of the teaching
areas in different sizes and shapes
Alex thanks for having us again I'm Alex
Le I worked on the been working on this
project for about two years with a break
in between so a very exciting project
that um should be coming to life in a
couple years but um yeah so this is a
floor plan of one of our typical
academic uh floors that make up the
three different neighborhood Wings where
students will spend most of their day um
we wanted to keep it open a sort of
two-way street with a uh influx of rooms
that are transparent punctuated with a u
an adaptable flexible community space at
one end and uh the center of the
building Hub at the other end
um here's an uh we call this an
axonometric drawing the images on the
right are pictures from some of our
projects some of our contemporaries
where um we wanted to really establish a
flavor for the space and an intent in
what goes on um so again aside from you
know classrooms with flexible furniture
and flexible uh technology and learning
techniques it was very important to
create um an active um adaptable
Corridor you you can see at the left
most of the um image near the stairs U
we call that our team common space
there's another team common space there
in the middle it allows students to
venture out from the
classrooms um teachers to expand their
learning modules into sort of
non-traditional settings and it just
yields a better variety of of
educational experiences for everybody
involved um just kind of you know
stacking it up over two and three
stories um there are you know I think
the stairs provide a vertical vertical
continuity amongst the space um you can
see that team comments there on the end
is nice and glazed open so that provides
a very strong visual connection both to
the interior and exterior of the space
um really allowing the scenery of um you
know the environment around the school
to become as much a part of the school
as the interior
fit um all at the same time you know
yielding a a classroom environment that
can
um utilize the traditional methods of
Education as
well so we have a couple renderings that
we'll run through so the the main thing
to keep in mind is um we're still maybe
a month or two out from selecting team
mascots uh school name and school colors
so a lot of the colors in these images
are placeholders and we're not we're not
certain what those will be yet but this
is uh one of the images of the team
Commons if I go back a slide it's that
that space down there on the far left
but um again a breakout space that can
be used as a study hall an extension of
the classroom uh it's got adaptable
furniture that can be moved around just
another way of activating what would
otherwise be a traditional Corridor
space that we've seen in all the schools
that we grew up in um surrounded on the
perimeter by those large glazed openings
that were mentioned that that give you
the nice views to the outside and
really provide a provide a means for
tons of daylight to come into the space
and um and
actually bring some of that scenery
inside um into their
world this is a shot of the cafeteria
space um I I forget how many students
how many seats we have in there probably
about seven or 800 but um this
is situated so that it overlooks um some
of the future athletic venues um
provides a nice tie into those spaces
again it's the daylight that's kind of
the star of the show um really using
that to increase the volume of what
otherwise is a is a kind of a a nice
clean area made up of uh traditional
materials terazzo flooor wood accents on
the walls um and and floating ceilings
to provide some acoustic control and
Alex that's the second floor overlooking
right this is the second floor yes so
underneath the space would be a locker
rooms and the training room for the
Athletics um but there's a this opens
out to an outdoor balcony wraparound
balcony on the outside so it provides an
extension for outdoor seating during uh
cafeteria hours or special
events okay um here's a shot of the
gymnasium um I I forgot how many seats
are in there probably I think it's
17,700 or 1800 but um full gymnasium
floor the bottom row of seats are
retractable which yields two cross two
full-size crosscourt basketball courts
for tournaments or training has a
wraparound
Concourse uh at which you enter the
space um that can be used for uh more
seating or um running laps around the
the
gymnasium um in addition to this space
we have have a full Athletics lobby with
concessions there's an auxiliary
gymnasium right next door for uh
practice and and and event spacing um as
well as a multi-purpose room on the
bottom floor behind the retractable
seats on the farthest left of the image
is another area for uh cheerleading
practice space or in wrestling space so
um it's a big area but there's really
you know six or seven embedded functions
in this really trying to get the most
use out of a giant room as
possible um this is the uh core of the
building the center room around which
all the academic wings are clustered um
were affectionately calling it The Tech
Forest it sort of functions like an
active wide Corridor sort of like an
airport terminal where uh opportunities
for seating breakout
spaces um again team comments efforts
um as with most schools nowadays there
should be uh full Wi-Fi coverage as well
as charging stations um in the far
distance would be the uh th seat theater
style Auditorium to the left through
those doors is the back porch and the
cafeteria that we looked at earlier so
again um Cloud ceilings over um a terazo
floor bright colors um splashes of wood
accenting to really bring that natural
to um some of the harder elements but um
just a clean area that's lends itself to
full adaptability and customization from
uh the end
users rightow back to Ben to talk about
the campus
layout just one one ex uh extra thing um
there a lot of those decision making um
uh on those renderings is still up for
debate when it comes to color um
specifically we've got a we've got a
know what your mascot is we got to know
what the name of the school is and
really make sure that we um marry those
two uh things together but what I love
about it is we had a lot of input from
from teachers and staff at your existing
high school we had a lot of um uh input
from athletic directors from maintenance
from op operation so um it's not just us
kind of giving that Vision um to you
it's it's actually being gathered by um
by us and interpreting that into the
into the design of the building so
that's really what's exciting to to us
here um not only is it just a building
right it's it's got to be located
somewhere and this site is uh a
tremendous a tremendous site it has its
features just like every large site um
in this area has its features um in on
the screen you can see green and blue uh
they look like uh Rivers they're
actually streams and wetlands uh on the
site uh this this site has a lot of
topography uh meaning a lot of up and
downs from an elevation standpoint so uh
as a result natural drainage are those
are those kind of squiggly lines that
you see on the screen um there so we
have to be conscious of those and and
understand um how we can touch them and
how we can how we need to stay away from
them uh kind of overall also you see
those U black arrows I've put those I
placed those on the screen just to kind
of indicate where the uh Ingress uh or
the entry into the sites uh would be
first uh what was diimler uh Boulevard
which is now Cannonball Run Cannonball
Run um at the at the bottom of the
screen has three areas in which um uh
will be tying into uh for the
infrastructure of of the site uh West uh
West Liberty Hills Road uh on the top of
the screen is also another Point uh in
which you'll be entering into the site
uh nearest to the elementary school uh
the high school because it is a a large
structure uh will take up the majority
of of the site right there in the Center
so high visibility uh lots of good
connection uh in and around lots of
parking distributed uh in and about uh
the areas uh and the opportunity for
athletics on the far left side um
attached to the to the high school
overall so when you take those uh there
are other small things here uh as well
buffers um like I mentioned grade
changes there's an easement here so all
of those were kind of taken into effect
on how you place uh the building um
overall
um as you kind of look at the developed
um site plan here this is the overall
developed master plan for for the
property um overall again that high
school right there in in the center uh
directly behind that High School uh the
high school footprint would be that
field that would one day be a stadium um
kind of overall with that that field is
is kind of related to as Alex mentioned
uh directly on access with the the
dining room so there's there's a direct
connection um that's that's POS positive
uh there on the left hand side you can
see all of the features and and Fields
um that we're putting into this property
based on the comments that we got back
from Athletics uh within within the
district a number of circulation paths
uh on on this one they're a little hard
to to understand but you've got you've
got to separate bus and car you've got
to make sure visitors uh and students
are separated as well you have to make
sure that all of your uh parking is
distributed but also distributed for not
only during school hours but after
school um potential uh activities such
as Athletics or practice or anything
else uh on on the outside of the outside
of the building so again our goal was to
try to make this fitting into uh the
environment uh of this uh site as much
as we could and we felt like we've
accomplished that uh overall last thing
I'd say about the site plan is uh upper
right hand corner is the footprint for
the elementary school we'll talk we can
can talk uh a little bit more about that
and answer any questions about that but
that's uh that remains uh the the
outline and the configuration for uh
that portion of the property kind of
overall if you'll go back one then just
let me interject so the community is
aware that we have we had a connection
road that was going from West Liberty
Hill down to what is now Cannonball Run
and it is still showing some of that but
that road now does not have to be a
public road going through the middle of
the site we've been able through
months we're working with the county on
that we've been able to get that changed
to just a private road which is going to
make that a much safer site glad you
mentioned that too yes absolutely
because the you know you don't want to
have General um traffic coming onto an
inhabited School site especially um one
with um splitting between a elementary
school and a and a high school so we're
glad to to kind of keep that design the
way that it needed to be uh done but
also you know provide more safety um at
the perimeter of the fac facility um as
well thank you for
that so three dimensions um kind of
overall uh I'll start with this one and
and let Alex um round us out here but uh
it's a big it's a big building right
it's three-story in in some parts it has
a basement uh that opens off onto that
field in the background uh that you see
there we are planning for and and
depicting you know a stadium um uh right
there in the back of the building so we
have to plan the entire site regardless
of what we what we build Now versus what
we build later so we have to make sure
that you've got the right space um and
proper circulation around that space as
well this is a shot from the front of
the building uh obviously that uh C
Central Area is what I discussed at the
very beginning having
Administration uh Guidance Clinic those
types of facilities on the ground floor
and uh sitting on top of that is the is
the media center overlooking the um
entry into the site another just good
passive uh system of being able to see
who's on the site who's coming to the
site uh and what they're doing on the
outside uh of the building just location
wise left hand side of the screen is the
Freshman Academy right hand side of the
screen is uh 10th through 12th grade uh
Athletics academics ah sorry academics
that's okay
apologies yes so it's a big building
however I think it was important and
appropriate to use materials in a subtle
and sensitive way not to make the
building loud or gy but to make it
elegant uh make it make it impressive
give it a sense of permanence materials
primarily for the building are local
brick engineered Stone and um some metal
paneling on the taller um on the third
story of the building so this is the
main entrance to the school um that uh
you can see there's a large two-story
Lobby there we wanted to put deep
overhangs on the building to help uh um
cut down on direct sunlight glare into
the building as well as um give it a
sense of local flavor um as well um to
the right of the entrance in this image
is the uh Administration level with the
media center right above
it this is a shot of one of the
three-story academic wings so we looked
at the interior of that glassy area that
glass box area in one of the earlier
interior renderings um where we showed
the team Commons but again um wanted to
give a sense of that deep overhang
floating roof structure um you know the
brick plays a large part here with the
natural coloring um give it warm earthy
tones to the right of this image it
leads into an exterior Amphitheater that
is behind the school that will be used
as a um again like a hangout spot or an
area for performances Outdoors
here's a shot from the athletic field um
potential Stadium behind the schools
that looks out over into the cafeteria
with a wraparound porch and Below on
that ground level is the uh training
room and athletic lockers the curved
element to the left of that is the
exterior wall of the theater Auditorium
space
Oh I thought there were more but um yeah
so we we we wanted to show these to give
a sense of again the the language the
style uh the general coloring of the
building some of this stuff may change
it just a touch over time but um again
you know it it it was important to us to
um again create that interior exterior
Connection in a manner that wasn't uh
Extremely Loud was comfortable for the
student students um bring it down to a
pedestrian scale so that they're not
overwhelmed by the size of the building
as
well y add to
that so with that you know we're we're
kind of at the stage where we finished
um our our work from a design standpoint
we've put that over to the office of
school facilities um and uh Alex set
through um multiple days of of making
sure that that uh the office of school
facilities was satisfied they had very
few um comments so pending any
additional um permitting issues with the
local jurisdiction the county um uh OSF
is OSF and do seem to be satisfied with
the position of of the of the design uh
from a permitting standpoint uh so next
steps um if you'll recall we're breaking
this into several different packages uh
so that it can be again let through time
the first package is the site package
where we prepare the site uh get all
main um um trees U taken out or uh land
moved uh in preparation for for the
building uh and the infrastructure being
built uh that site development package
your site preparation package the
building package number two uh is that
building that comes along um you know
several months after that work gets
started so that's really what we focused
on here um tonight overall is that is
that building uh and we feel like we're
finally about to hit that Milestone of
of being able to um to really see that
come out of the ground uh here in the
next several months um the two other
pack there are two other packages uh
involved with the work uh first the High
School athletic package uh which comes
on later down the road um as the
building gets under construction so that
when that building in sight uh
preparation is finished uh they can they
can come back can and complete the the
Athletics as well uh and then the fourth
and final package uh the elementary
school um overall all of these have
different time frames I'll just point
that out uh as well the elementary
school um for instance uh doesn't have
the same construction schedule it's got
a much more abbreviated construction
schedule than the high school um the the
Athletics package has is much briefer
although we don't need it right now we
need it when the school is getting
closer to being ready to be open so
we've kind of tried to Mastermind uh the
location of those uh packages within
within the time frame uh allowed
overall um and and with that uh I'll
stop talking and answer any questions
that you guys have again a pleasure to
be with you again this is an exciting
project um I I know it seems like it's
taken for for uh for a very long time to
get here but uh glad we're finally at
the uh nearing that Milestone uh for for
construction Ben and Alex thank you for
that detailed presentation board members
do you have questions for them about any
of the designs or construction pieces of
this um the dining hall has two
floors dining H excuse me dining hall is
one floor it's on the ground floor and
below the dining hall is uh training
room uh weight room all the athletic
support spaces and they actually U
because they underneath the dining room
they they discharge directly onto the
field okay so it looks like it's on the
second floor when you're looking back
from the field but on the interior of
the building it's on the first floor yes
yeah correct and there's outdoor seating
as well okay and Ben this site was
planned also with future thoughts of at
additions as
needed AB absolutely each one of those
wings we're not depicting it on the
screen but in the site plan and the and
the floor plan we made sure that each
one of those wings could be extended by
a series of of classrooms to continue to
breing bring the um enrollment up over
over really the whenever you decide that
you need to bring the enrollment up Ben
would you talk a little bit about the
teacher lounge workroom space that we
decided to go with here and how that'll
help with classroom usage that's right
um so if you'll remember the setup uh to
each one of those academic Wings we have
the uh at the at uh traditional academic
areas on the perimeter of the building
but that Central core area uh has a
number of of either small meeting spaces
but it has a central area for teachers
uh and staff and and that's meant to be
their home uh they have their desk in
there they have their effects uh in
there that's their that's their space
during the school day now what does that
do it it allows you uh to really utilize
each one of those classrooms at a higher
rate um so that you so that you can then
uh be very flexible in terms of your
enrollment over time um so that was one
feature
um that that is that makes this one
pretty unique um uh for here uh in for
Clover school district of course but um
the location of that is right there in
the center so they can see everything
that's the that's the whole reason it's
located where it's located so they can
see what's going on in the corridors
they can see teachers I mean uh can see
what's going on in um inside and outside
the classrooms does that answer your
question Quinn does it does it just it's
going to allow us again to to utilize
those rooms so that maybe we don't have
to build another high school down the
road that we can use every room every
period so but the difference is they do
the teachers do have a home they have a
home to keep their belongings and their
things and they would just go to the
rather than being a cart that is correct
and and we don't have that space
currently at Clover High School to do
that
right any other questions the teacher
botel you're talking about not too
dissimilar to a college setup with kind
of share classrooms and professors would
have their office and then they would
just use classrooms or share as as
needed right that's right that's that's
the trend for for today
yes all right thank you very much we
appreciate that so that's where we want
to be that's the vision of where we're
going now what we would like to do I'll
ask Dr Hopkins um Mr Kelly Clayton um
Brian cret you might want to come close
by some of our um oper engineering
construction people who've been helping
us get our site ready and get our site
permitted which is a process and it's a
long process it's a process that begins
after a before and after a bond so I've
asked Dr Hopkins to walk us through the
details of what that process has been
and where we are right now to hopefully
getting that site permit to actually be
able to build so Dr Hopkins all right um
as as Dr Quinn mentioned Kelly and Brian
and even Ben are here to help answer
some questions that you may have
regarding this timeline what my goal is
to sort of give an overview sort of the
anatomy of a civil plan submission uh
from our perspective the challenges that
we've met and the parts that we have had
to complete in order to get this through
uh to hopefully um approval soon um the
the the site approval process is really
four areas the civil construction plan
is kind of the umbrella that's the where
the roads go where the schools go Etc
also part of that civil plan uh is
public sewer
access um the traffic impact analysis
which you've heard us talk about many
times over the past several months and
then also the fourth part of that are
the Nationwide permits that we have
applied for with regard to Crossings of
those uh stream sites that that Ben
pointed out earlier on that initial
traffic uh excuse me site plan picture
he shared so what I've done I've
included in the supporting document sort
of a chronological timeline of
everything that's in this presentation
but but I'm breaking this up down each
of these Pathways okay but understand
that these are running concurrent with
one another if I went through everything
I'd have to jump around from one to the
other it would be tough to follow so
I've broken this down into the four
Pathways that we're working on towards
approval of this site plan
okay the civil construction site plan
must be approved by York County in order
for them to issue a building permit
that's what we're waiting on right now
that includes the review of the overall
sight layout the grading campus
entrances campus roads parking utility
infrastructure building locations Etc
the whole big picture it encompasses all
of that public sewer access and traffic
impact analysis are big parts of our
site plan for this
site um work began on this before the
first Bond okay as we prepared for the
first Bond we began to to do the ground
work uh to be able to hit the ground
running whenever that time came so back
in U um July of 21 um Bri and team
submitted a sketch plan to the to York
County for review which is just a basic
uh General conception of how this site
may work to get some initial feedback at
some areas that we may work on receive
those comments back on them uh pointed
out some issues and concerns with Tia
and the public sewer access um so we had
done a little bit of that pre-work and
then in September of that year the bond
failed and at that point we halted all
work on the on the bond uh so we paused
McMill Paz and Smith we paused Timmons
we paused everybody until we sort of
regrouped and found out what our
strategy was from that point going
forward um and November of the following
year in 22 uh we're blessed to have that
second um Bond pass thanks to the
community for that and at that point we
began to re-engage all the parties to
restart this uh this process um a revise
trans uh excuse me sketch plan was
submitted to York County soon after that
um they denied the review not denied the
thing not denied the plan itself but
they said there was no significant
changes from the initial plan so it
didn't need to go through review so we
began to move forward based on that um
notification um from December to July um
there's a lot of work going on with
regard to the Tia with regard to the
sewer system with regard to design Etc
um so that's a little brief picture of
the first steps of the site plan we
weren't able to make a submitt until
July of 21 uh one of the questions that
I've been asked is why would it take so
long to get that in uh from that Bond
passing to get everybody re-engaged and
then to begin to address some of the
issues that were put in front of us with
regard to traffic impact analysis and
Sewer um system that took time to get
ready for that first official submitt
which occurred on the 21st of July this
year we received a pro a not approved
comments on the 25th mainly surrounding
access to public sewer the traffic
impact analysis is overall and then the
buffer tree survey which came up um
which is the area that is around the
exterior of the site 50 ft off of the
property line we're not we're not
touching okay and I'll get back to to
what we did on that um in just a second
um what we did uh excuse me didn't mean
to get off track there what we did to
address the buffer tree issue is we
applied for a variants uh for a buffer
tree survey um the county was going to
require us to survey all the trees
within that buffer um which was a pretty
substantial um Financial commitment by
the district we were able to submit a uh
an application for a variance from the
zoning board of appeals for the county
uh we submitted that on the on uh
October 7th on the 12th uh the vote the
zba approved that variance which uh
removed our mandate to survey the buffer
zone okay um so that obstacle was
removed um we we got uh right after the
second submitt we got our comments back
for not approve for our second submittal
on the 18th of September that month um
the main issues coming up again were Tia
and Sewer sewer pump station and also
grand trees that had been located on the
site um on the 15th of that the
following month um the county met with
um all of our Representatives the
district our engineering firm our
Management Group uh representative Pope
the South Carolina do the county manager
and the county staff that actually
reviews this we had a big meeting over
at the County Planning Department in
November of this year um to go over
these issues try to come to yes on how
we might be able to approach and come up
with a strategy to be able to come to
yes on our site plan um based on that
meeting we were soon uh we soon made our
third submitt of the site plan and our
comments are due on that one this week
we have not officially received those
yet however um I want to go back and say
that um in between the second and third
submittal of the sitech plan okay one of
the things that was a little bit of
delay is we discovered that we were
being held initially in the traffic
impact analysis and correct me if I'm
wrong Brian and Kelly um to the um 2018
or 2019 ordinances the newest set of
ordinances when in fact because of the
development agreement for this
subdivision we were should have been
held to the standards of the 2010
ordinances that appli to8 I believe 2008
ordinances that appli to that
development agreement so that changed
the circumstances a little bit we gained
a little bit we lost a little bit in
that transaction but we finally got that
squared away and from that point forward
we've been being reviewed under the the
correct set of um standards can I Mr um
Clayton that is exactly why we had to go
to zba for the buffer treats because of
that change in ordinances back to 2008
we had to
we had to get that removed through that
process rather than just a county
decision yes but um Brian May can speak
more to it but but that yes that was one
of the reasons for going for the
variance the current ordinance
um would have given a little more leeway
on that topic or that requirement but
because we were being reviewed under the
2008 ordinance uh we had to go to bza to
get that to get that
wave yeah
all right so overall the site plan the
submissions that's where we're at we're
in our third subal right now awaiting
comments from the county okay and as you
know we've talked a lot about the we're
getting our back up against the timeline
a little bit we're really hoping to get
some movement and I've got some comments
with that regard uh coming up shortly
the second part of uh of this that I'm
going to talk about is the public sewer
access the developer of the Allison
Creek um project itself the the the
larger Allison Creek project
uh installed the pump station in 2010 uh
but it was never accepted by York County
because there was no development there
yet okay um so the pump station must be
accepted by York County prior to civil
plan approval so we can proceed with the
development CSD schools are the first
projects in the development so we're the
one that catches making sure working
with the developer to ensure that we get
the public sewer access um going that we
need um one thing we learned in this
because the original Pump Station um was
installed uh in 2010 or prior uh the
county was going to uh require us to
have new DEC permitting for operation
and construction prior to them accepting
the sewer system this was another
element of delay for us because they
required us for a new construction
permit to basically redesign the
existing system with today's standards
concurrently the developer did all the
testing that was necessary sent cameras
down in the in the um in the piping to
ensure that everything is working they
worked on the electrics um got the uh I
think York electric is the service
provider for that so this has been going
on we've been working with the developer
closely on this and and happy we're
making some progress there another part
of this which we're still working on are
the easements that are required for that
um and I think the developers working
with the county on that I'll have some
comments in that in a minute if there
are any more to go with that um so let's
go back to the Sewer access again we
started before the first Bond um we
requested a meeting um in August of 21
met with York County in August that uh
same year about the pump station we
received an email with this listing of
what the county told us needed to be
done and our understanding is that same
list was provided um to the developer so
we were working from the same page here
again the bond failed in September of
that year we halted all work so we're in
a pause for the next year uh in a month
or two um when the bond pass we
restarted the project again we met with
a developer regarding the sewer pump
station what needed to be done the
developer then met with York County
share the information um that of their
requirements um for what needed to
happen for them to accept this and get
it online um they again reiterated the
the requirements that they had shared
with us and as I mentioned before the
first project in the development must
include that pump station which is why
we have we're dealing with that right
now along with the
development
um in March of that year um the county
confirmed with us that desite excuse me
design plans for the pump station had to
be resubmitted heard me mention that
they were going to require us to get a
new construction permit which would
require a new design or redesign of the
existing uh Pump Station and Sewer
infrastructure um that met today's
standards and codes and Brian's team was
able to complete that for us um in April
of that year uh we met again with them
we tried to get another meeting together
in uh in that month uh to go over the um
the requisites make sure everybody's on
the same page working towards uh getting
access and opening of the sewer uh
facility um so uh we had a meeting set
up on the 2nd um then the county
required it become virtual and then I'm
not sure exactly what happened that
meeting was cancelled or removed um or
either they felt like they had provided
us with the information we needed and
didn't feel like that was needed to be
pursued so I'll turn it over if there's
any more comments regarding that
interchange that that's accurate we we
scheduled a meeting with the county to
try to bring all the parties together to
discuss the pump station and we had a a
date SCH scheduled for the 2nd of May um
and then the closer we got to that date
the county um cancelled the meeting and
and would not meet with us to talk to
talk about about the specifics of the
count of the
conation at that point we solicited
proposals from our design team and moved
forward with the design process so I
would like to ask a question about that
so the pump station was constructed back
in
2010 so it was already constructed but
we had to have a permit to construct yes
because they wanted to be sure that
whatever was engineered and and in the
pump station there were plans and
designs that matched that engineering
and Brian I know that you did that work
so you might want to answer that
question
yeah I think the key to it all is is not
that there was anything wrong with the
pump station or any of the
infrastructure that was in the ground at
the end of the day because it wasn't um
uh started up and accepted by yourk
County um we're going to need an author
authorization to operate that system
from dhack dhack cannot issue an
authorization to operate without an
active permit when the pump station was
never accepted the permit expired so we
had to basically start over with the
permitting process in order to get a
permit in order to do the inspections in
order for York County to say yes we're
good we're going to accept this for
maintenance um York County as with most
jurisdictions will not accept public
infrastructure that does not have active
flow to it they don't want to maintain a
system that's not being used for
anything so our project happens to be
the first one that's coming in that's
going to have flow to it so we had to
restart that permit process so we have
something to inspect against for DHC to
be able to give us that authorization to
operate and Brian how many weeks months
did it take for you to redraw the
drawings for that pump station so that
that caused a delay in us getting that
initial it it was roughly 60 days a
couple of months in there to uh to to to
re certify everything in order to check
that everything was um done correctly
according to the current County
standards and dhx standards so it was
roughly 60 days and so and one more
question the the developer
really was was on the hook for doing
these things but they were given a
different list of things to do that did
not include these plans correct yeah I
think there was a little disconnect um
uh between items that had to be done in
order to um uh in order for the county
to physically inspect and accept the
system and then the permitting side of
things of things that needed to be done
there and I I think looking back at it
now what was happening was the developer
was getting the list of physical things
things that had to be done inspections
testing things of that nature we were
getting the list of things that needed
to be done from a um from a permitting
and uh uh going through DHC
standpoint thank
you to make a point here I I believe and
correct me if I'm wrong but we were
getting ready when hopeful our first
submission was going to be in May of
that year and so this is an example of
one of the obstacles that we came up
against that caused about a month or so
delay in that process so basically from
May
um once we got this figured out until
July when we made that submission is
when Brian began the work and finished
that design redesign of the pump
station the next big part of the Civil
plan is the traffic impact analysis and
then we've talked about this several
times over the past several months but I
wanted to kind of go through where we
are with that um now that they have our
fourth submitt on our traffic plan and
how that has evolved uh the traffic um
impact analysis is re re ired as part of
approval for a site plan so that's why
it's a big part of of our efforts um IT
projects increases in tra and traffic
loads and wait times at intersections
all of those things uh that are
generated by the schools and the
district the the people building there
the district is responsible for
mitigating those traffic situations that
occur because of the traffic that our
site will generate um the the Tia must
also be approved by the South Carolina
do um which governs the traffic with on
campus um within the campus um how the
separation you heard Ben mentioned
earlier separation of buses cars
visitors Etc all of that is done through
the the do and um one point that I want
to make and I'll let Brian uh explain uh
a little more eloquently than I'm sure I
could the differences between the way
the county interprets a TIA and the way
the do interprets a TIA um and the rtia
has has gotten approval from the do at
every term but there are some other
obstacles that we worked through with
the county and I'll say this and correct
me if I'm wrong Brian keep keep you off
the hook but the county looks at maximum
loads at peak times okay so for our
School site those peak times would be
drop off in the morning for the
elementary and the high and then pick up
for the elementary high in the afternoon
so the traffic that's generated at those
peak times is what the county is looking
at primarily when they make decisions on
approval of a
TIA okay the state's a little bit
different yeah I think um so there are
different interpretations and different
requirements for both the the state and
the county and I think the county has an
extremely detailed ordinance um that
apply to traffic impact analyses um
under their current ordinance and uh as
we were going through those um it it
didn't give a lot of leeway for um
interpretation or for for uh staff to
really work with us on how to apply the
mitigation um items that we had
identified uh in the study uh to to be
able to meet those requirements
um as we work through things with Scot
and as we work through things with the
county um the county as uh Dr Hopkins
said uh we'll look at um uh basically um
delays at each intersection so when
we're looking at functionality of each
intersection whether it's our driveways
whether it's uh surrounding areas um
those delays will um basically result in
a letter grade passing failing uh within
those different intersections um the
delays can be generated by a number of
factors and a lot of them have to do
with when we're trying to make left
turns and when you have a lot of
background traffic on some of our busier
roads um you may have to wait a little
longer during peak hours to be able to
make a left turn on on a road or out of
a driveway and I think that's what was
really kicking us into um having to
mitigate for some of those um situations
that were going to occur in a very
narrow time frame just during pickup and
drop off in in the mornings so when we
looked at things overall which Scot
tends to do um and how this really
impacts the infrastructure around there
um uh they were uh having us review
under a little slightly different Cate
um uh CR criteria than the county was
and we really couldn't get over the hump
on some of those um challenges that we
had when we were looking at delays um
even those those delays caused a failing
grade when you looked at some of the
background it could be one car it could
be two cars it wasn't like we were
stacking cars way down the intersection
so trying to work through some of those
um sticking points in their current
ordinance really cause some delays and
how we operate the U the the school as a
whole and and this we were also under
the 2008 ordinance which caused a
correct different interpretation um as
part of the good news of uh switching
back to the 2008 we identified and
pointed out to the county that um we
shouldn't be held to the current
2023 uh code with uh with regards to
traffic impact analysis we should go
back to the 2008 which um was a lot U
smaller document a lot less requirements
still had some sticking points in there
and it was a little little more vague as
to what some of those requirements were
it did help us out some it gives it it
gives the county a little bit more
leeway to work within those gray areas
when we can look at specific
intersections specific delays and and
how they're functioning and that's what
we've finally been able to move forward
with today so Brian do you find I know
you do a lot of work over is do you find
other counties that have the same issue
with the state like
contradictory um I I would say most
places that we work have uh give their
staff more leeway to be able to um work
with applicants to come up with the most
sensible mitigation aspects that will
work for the community and for the
functionality of the roads um again the
the ordinances is currently written is
is very black and white and there's not
much room to play in the gray area um
and and really try to understand how we
can how these intersections are really
going to function and whether it's
really something that um needs to be
mitigated would you please just go over
quickly
um some of the mitigations that we're
going to be asked to do sure as
currently draft I jump in real quick
just to pigy back on that because I'm
I'm not sure you that I'm totally clear
on that with what Rob's question was is
it typically beholding on the developer
in this case CSD to go to the county who
interprets uh you know maybe a
development agreement a certain way what
year we talked about that a lot is it
always behold R the developer to
convince the county that we should be
held to a different standard in All
Counties is that
Prett common I would say rarely but I
will also say this is um this is a
unique case with the zoning that we have
in place there is a 250 page development
agreement that's with a a plan
development that we don't run across
every day and it's it's a lot on staff
it's it's a lot on the applicant it's a
lot on uh developers to go in and do
their homework and due diligence and dig
into these things and really um uh
understand what's the what's the rule
book there um I would say it's a little
more out of the ordinary for us to have
to point out as many times as we did
this go around that we should held under
2 I would hope so and I would say real
quick before you before Brian gives you
the the actual mitigation requirements
just to remind everyone U
274 um and diimler are and 49 for that
matter are all state roads so they fall
under the jurisdiction of the D D so
when you when you ask for a traffic
signal you have to meet certain do
standards and warrants for those signals
so if our Tia is requiring mitigation at
one of those intersections then we have
to get that approval from the do
although it's the county that's
reviewing and approve approving our plan
so we happen to fall into a situation
where we're trying to mitigate a traffic
study that's required by the
county but but yet the dot governs those
roads and they won't allow signals to be
added on those roads yeah and that's a
great point I think in a lot of the
localities we work in
um the even though we work closely with
the counties on what those mitigation
items should be in most cases it's
followed by if Allowed by Scot if it's
on a state road we didn't have that
leeway here it was you have to mitigate
you have to bring this to a passing
situation so we ended up with a little
bit of conflict between what we had to
do to satisfy the county versus what s
would allow us to do and in some cases
we agreed with the county I'm going to
be very fair like we we for example
wanted a a a traffic light at Cannonball
Run and Highway 274 we wanted that we
asked for that we just don't meet the
standard by South Carolina do standards
to get us traffic light there so that is
an area where the county and we were on
the same page but that we couldn't make
that happen so that's correct yeah the
way um it is a very high threshold to
hit warrants for a traffic signal with
South Carolina Department of
Transportation and um unfortunately the
way they enact those is um you have to
show them that it's needed not
projecting into the future of what's
going to be needed they have to see it
they have to they have to count it
actually um functioning I I think the
frustrating part of this maybe for folks
that are listening is is there not a
surely this is not the first time this
has happened when a County Road meets a
a state road and the requirements are
different and and the frustrating thing
is is there not a formal process of some
kind of arbitration or mitigation or a
meeting because it seems like we've done
a lot of this background work to pull in
whether it's representative Pope or
whoever else to say somebody please help
us figure this out and it didn't seem
like there was a formal process for the
am I right about that yeah I mean I
think as far as the process goes it's
getting everybody in the room together
to talk about here's what we're trying
to meet for the county here's what we're
trying to meet with the state and really
almost having them have that dialogue we
did that several times as well um
unfortunately when the rules got changed
on us a little bit to the 2008 we had to
redo that meeting again to say here our
NE here our new requirements here's what
we've studied now here's what Do's
requirements are now let's talk about
those mitigation items now right so will
you go over now the mitigation items
we're going to Sure need to do for this
site yeah as as currently um drafted in
our traffic impact analysis that's uh
being finished up review at the county
um now um
we have a few items that we've
identified for mitigation for uh for
traffic impact from from the school
facilities number one being how we
operate the schools so during our peak
hours um in order to uh avoid having
failing intersections at both ends of
Cannonball Run um we're going to have to
direct our traffic uh out of the school
right turn only to avoid delays in a
left turn so exiting traffic from our
school all three driveways will be right
out only going towards 40 9 what that
causes at 49 is a failing condition
there with the intersection of
Cannonball Run in 49 um in working with
some of the other developers within this
um uh PD um uh We've identified uh the
the use of a traffic circle there would
meet both seot and County requirements
for mitigation there doesn't meet the
warrant for signal yet we can't direct
everybody just to make a write out onto
49 so a traffic Circle there um would be
a mitigation that that should item that
would be acceptable to uh uh to all
parties um then uh looking back over to
274 we had to study a number of
intersections there because we're
sending all of our traffic right out of
our school only um it does not cause a
failing condition at 274 in Cannonball
Run so no mitigation is required there
at this time that's the signal we were
kind of lobbying for that uh Dr Quinn
mentioned uh that doesn't meet the
requirements today eventually we're all
it's all set up for a signal one will
probably go there at some point um but
today we we can't put one there um there
was one intersection on uh 274 that
created a failing condition and it's at
the West Liberty Hill Pinnacle way is on
the east side of 274 and that uh 274
intersection and really the failing
movement from that intersection was
people coming out of Pinnacle way trying
to turn left going Southbound on 27 four
it created a a delay condition that put
us in a failing grade with the county
even though the number of cars that are
going to be delayed there are very very
minimal um it created a delay condition
there the only things the only
mitigation options we had at that
intersection was either to send
everybody right going north on
274 um to avoid that delay in a left
turn or when warranted uh we could add a
signal there at that intersection so one
one of our recommendations there for
mitigation was when warranted and
Allowed by Scot a signal would go with
that West Liberty Hill Pinnacle way to
74
intersection and and to touch on West
Liberty Pinnacle I think it's important
to note that that intersection currently
fails um so it it it was a failing
condition even without the school with
just background traffic only factored in
Pinnacle way currently fails so because
we are reducing it further they're
making us mitigate
it and and the way we're we're having to
analyze intersections especially such as
that one is is very conservative um
you've got a four-lane road with a
middle dual left turns in the in the
middle um the way we're required to
analyze that area is um it doesn't
assume that um it it delay is caused by
finding any opening it can for a left
turnout so even if a car is in the far
right hand lane coming Southbound on
274 that car making a left turn has to
wait that's not really realistic it's
Ultra conservative but um that's just
the way that we're required under the
software so Tia has been probably our
biggest hurdle in this site plan being
approved I I think there's a lot of
tentacles interweaved in there I think
Tia is definitely near the top of that
list and primarily with um you know even
to take it a step further um originally
before we had the zoning case amended to
remove the connection the required
connection to West Liberty Hill we were
having to allocate and account for um
some level of traffic going through our
site out to that roadway not because we
wanted to not because we thought it was
needed um but because of the County's
interpretation of the uh PD um it said a
connection was war was needed there and
we couldn't restrict it in any way so we
had to account for traffic going to West
Liberty Hill so we were trying to figure
out not only how do we account for that
traffic through the site um but it was
influencing how we designed the site
where's our bus drop off going to be
where's our parent drop off going to be
where our students going to come in
because we did we wanted them to be
separate from that driveway that had to
connect it had to be separate um South
Carolina OSF does not allow you to
intermingle those those track trips on
SES we spent a lot of time trying to in
trying to work through the Tia
requirements and the PD requirements not
only to to check the box with the county
and do but it it directly influenced how
we designed that site in in addition to
having that required connection to West
Liberty also would have triggered
improvements to West Liberty he so that
was why getting that py amended to
remove required connection was also
important to try to to save money on
that Improvement to West Liberty and
Improvement meaning widening widening
correct widening
yeah all right that's a lot of detail on
traffic but traffic has been a big
hurdle and I wanted you to understand
that for of that delay that we've had
because of the Tia Dr Hopkins if you'll
finish it off please go through the
quickly go through the remainder of this
timeline just to give you a picture of
the work that's gone into the
development of this Tia here again back
before the first Bond we began some work
uh on the Tia uh determining the number
of loads or number of trips Etc uh the
first TI was submitted to dot in York
County and six of excuse me June of 21
um they did not review and no comments
were received because soon after that
um Bond got the bond failed so here
again we were at a pause for almost a
year uh as we as we did that and we
kicked back up after the passage of the
second Bond uh in uh July of 21 we met
with a County DOT
uh this is again prior to the bond
failing uh making sure that we had all
our ducks in a row uh to the best we
could uh the dot confirmed the site was
approved for high school so that was our
first indication from the do that we
were approved on their level uh then I'm
sorry I got a little ahead of myself the
bond failed um we got the comments back
from the preliminary site after that and
then the bond passed and we re-engaged
all parties uh working towards this Tia
again in October of 22 we emailed Brian
emailed the do to restart the project um
it wasn't until January 25th that we got
a response from the the do uh to get
that started again and that was a
function of the person with whom we've
been dealing through the entire process
was retiring not in the office they had
to get a replacement in so once that was
done is when we got the got the response
from Dot and and Brian began his work
there in uh February of
23 uh we met with York County and the
dot to discuss the layout and the Tia
requirements uh York County required an
update to the Tia to reflect other known
projects in the area meaning we had to
account for what may be coming down the
road we didn't necessarily have to
design the TA for all the potential um
developments within the PD but we had to
account for that that probability um we
also at that meeting received
clarification on the entrances as well
as traffic data from the other
developments we Brian put all that data
together for another resubmittal of the
Tia
um in uh March of that year again we met
again with the county staff to discuss
that connection requirement uh which
Brian mentioned a little earlier it was
language in the PD uh that applied only
to our pod um it was a phrase in there I
said a connection to West Liberty Hill
Road uh must be done and then our
initial uh site designs we had that
connection but it was really a gated
service road we had the connection to
Liberty Hill but it was a gated service
road that we control controlled it was
subsequent to that that the county let
us know that that was going to have to
be a public full access road that we
could not restrict in any way through
the campuses and that began the dialogue
of the issues that that concerned or
that that brought up concerning the
district and how that impacted the
traffic impact analysis
Etc um we wanted to get clarification on
that uh so we actually applied for a
zoning cord zoning code
interpretation uh in uh March of that
year to get official stance from the
county on where they stood on their
interpretation of that connection phrase
within there
um they let us know that their
interpretation with stood that it needed
to be an open road based on their
interpretation of the PD um and we made
those uh on excuse me 328 we made the
application for that zoning Port
interpretation and then on the 18th of
April we got that determination that
that was in fact a full access R so Mr
bur that was the formal process we the
the county has a formal process of we
want a final determination we don't
think a connection means a public road
they held was held that it did mean a
public road so now the only way to undo
that is the steps that we had to take
next which delayed us a little further
so Dr Hopkins is going to go over that
and I'll jump to that in just a second
let me just finish this little timeline
so in May of that year we submitted our
second Tia and uh July early July we
received our denied comments um not
approved comments uh outlining their
concerns at the impacts of intersections
as Brian mentioned that cannibal run in
Highway 49 cannabal run in 274 where
Liberty 274 49 and 274 and Pinn away in
274 so all of these were sort of uh
highlighted as potential issues as part
of that we did our best Brian worked
hard and met with uh uh County officials
and his uh traffic impact team uh we
made another submittal on 723 which was
our third TI that we submitted to the um
to the county on 811 we got our not
approved comment sort of reiterating
some of the mitigations that were
necessary at the at the many of those
same um intersections that I just um
shared with you as at that time I
believe that Brian's team actually uh we
redid the counts in all the surrounding
areas West Liberty Hill Road damler um
Brian had his team go out there with the
little
rubber uh and the camera's taking
pictures of how many cars go through in
that 8 hour period and then all that
data was put in to make our fourth Tia
submittal uh which is currently under
review from the uh from the county I
would point out that on the 5th uh last
week we did approve get approval from
the dot for rtia so we're really waiting
to work through the issues uh uh with
the um County and those comments are
due I've got today's date technically
but I don't think they're officially in
just yet so we're still hopeful that
we'll get the comments on this for
submitt of the Tia and third submitt of
the plans this week and if not approval
a clear plan on how to get
there and the D yeah the do just
clarifying the dot approval that we did
receive on the 5th was the state office
we're still waiting on the district
office and Mark that you said that a lot
of this was because of an interpretation
what could have been the other
interpretations of the of the word
connectivity on that
site we interpreted and Brian team
interpreted connect well I'll let Brian
talk about that since he made the
decision in ter as part of our um fact
finding or or questioning staff on what
does the word connection mean um you
know to us it meant a driveway all we
had to do was connect a driveway to it
but we could control it um they said no
I don't think that's the interpret
that's that's the intent of it so as
part of our application process we had
to go through and do our own scrub of
the PD and state our reasons why we felt
um different things meant what they mean
and uh so we as part of that uh staff
determination process um we stated our
position that we felt like the intent of
the ordinance was to make a driveway
connection that way we could control
exit enter however we want if it would
have required a public road it would
have stated as such in that ordinance
that was our position um we were looking
for confirmation from staff on that
staff had a different interpretation of
that that said we cannot restrict that
driveway in any way and we need to
account for some level of public um
access through that driveway that was
the the the difference and it could have
been if I'm correct and I've heard this
as we were going through this process it
could have been dead end Private Road
public road all of those are
connectivity correct entrance
way but they chose public yes yeah there
were different levels of use for that
road um they said without it
specifically
stating um in direct terms in there they
had to take the most conservative
approach which meant public
road and let me clarify a public road it
it would not have been and never would
have been a public road okay what they
are saying is it would have had to have
been a a through connection from West
Liberty to diimler SL canonball run
without restrictions so it we would
never have built a public road and
deeded it to the county it would have
remained a private drive but you would
not have been able to control who cut
through your site during the school day
which was not a good situation so that's
why we did not agree with how they were
interpreting the word
connection which required us to go
through Council and Council was
supportive of us removing removing that
word which we appreciative very
appreciative of and I will say real
quick on the timeline uh some of you may
be thinking well if we got comments on
in July and we turned around and
resubmitted again the same month why
didn't we address everything that they
that they pointed out to us in the
second cemental right what we did we got
one comment on the second
review we we we addressed the one
comment turn it send it back in and then
we got five or six new ones on the third
and the uh the between the August and
November timelines where around that
time when we um question staff on uh
2023 ordinance versus 20 2008 ordinance
again that helped us out in some aspects
in other aspects we had to go out and
recount some areas um which caused the
delay and rerunning that uh that traffic
impact analysis for the November
S I don't think we need to read
everything just because we need to move
on to the next topic just going through
I think Brian hit the nail on the head
that the difference in interpretation we
interpreted connection is you just have
to be able to connect to West Liberty
whereas the county connect interpreted
connection as a connection between
damler and West Liberty in a nutshell so
you heard talk about the PD Amendment we
went through the process to get that
language that that applied to our pod
changed um Brian put together the the
proposal and the exhibits we made the
application the resoning application to
York County um that had to go through
three readings of the council we're very
grateful to the Council for supporting
us on this um and it did pass at the
last meeting uh which I believe was the
4th of uh December so uh that
requirement is removed which did um not
Al alleviate the mitigation at the
Pinnacle way intersection and and
Liberty Hill where they crossed but it
did remove our responsibility to make
improvements to Liberty Hill Road itself
because of the traffic we would put on
it um so there just is a little short
timeline of the process that we went
through the successful process it
through to get the PD
amended uh the last part of this are the
Nationwide permits um we've applied to
the Army Core of Engineers to approve
four creek crossings and two Wetlands
impacts uh the proposal for coverted
culverted Crossings um if you think back
to the the site plan that Ben shared
with you you saw where the entrances
would require Crossings of a couple of
those streams uh that were on the site
um there are a couple of ways that you
can cross a stream one is to build a
bridge which is referred to as a
bottomless cover and the other way is to
build a culverted Crossing which has the
pipe and it's filled in and the road
goes over it um that is the essence of
our application to the Army Corps is to
get our covered Culvert Crossings
approved
um main reason behind that is because
this is a huge savings to our taxpayers
it's probably at least double the cost
or more than double if not triple the
cost of building a bridge versus a
regular coverted Crossings so this is an
effort to save the taxpayer as money and
an effort that we felt was worth going
through these take several months to go
through up to 6 months we're still going
through that process just to give you a
little idea of how that started uh here
again early on when we began talking
about this we just wanted to sort of
test the viability of the site Brian
reached out we received a delineation
concurrence from the Army Corps in 2020
um and then we picked up uh in 2023 once
after we re-engage with the second Bond
the whole permitting process for those
crossings that I just mentioned and
there's a short timeline of where we sit
with that we're still waiting on um on
feedback uh from not only uh the Army
Corps but I think DEC has some some say
in this as well in terms of the storm
water yeah correct we haven't received
this yet but this is not holding up the
the county S plan approval so this is
second and concurrent path with the uh
with with the County permitting process
and we did uh DEC had a public hearing
on this back in I believe a August
August 15th was when we met with the
neighborhood group at field day park
is
okay as I mentioned that's three
different Pathways all of these
timelines these four timelines are
congruent they mesh with each other um
you can see how they fit together
chronologically in that supporting
document of that um wanted to share this
with you we spent some time going
through this Kelly and I making sure we
hit the highlights to sort of give an
indication of what the processes have
been what have been the sticking points
along the way that have delayed us um
and the county throughout the process um
and and and how we can move forward um I
will say that over the last week after
our last submitt of the site plan and
tia um we have been in talks with the
county I know Kelly has has spoken to
them and Sheila has spoken to them um
we're very hopeful we're getting very
good indications from the county they
are uh they seem to be as ready as us to
to work through this and and finally um
get a site uh approved and going there
so we see a light emerging at the end of
the tunnel and based on our
conversations we feel very good that
we've got potential to at least
hopefully get some approval before the
end of the year um we've got some work
to do this week uh and before Christmas
but hopefully before Christmas we'll be
able to to share some good news in the
process I know that's a lot a lot of
dates um and I tried to break it up to
to minimize confusion as much as
possible but it's a very complex effort
and it's not only complex on our part
and the part of the engineers and
construction management it's a complex
effort for the county as well um because
all of these have to be individually
evaluated and analyzed by their staff um
and as as as Brian mentioned there's a
hug document that goes with
it you suppose against the ordinances
that the county has so it has been a
very complex project and um you know I
think um
we've gotten good responses from the
county when we need to not always been
the responses we wanted but they have
been responsive and we feel especially
now as we're coming to what hopefully
may be the Finish Line um we're getting
a lot more positive feedback as we Mo
final
approval so I want to give the
opportunity for you guys to ask any
questions myself or Brian or Kelly uh
regarding the timeline and the efforts
we've made
today Dr Hopkins first of all I'd like
to say thank you all for your
consistency and your your patience and
your flexibility and your persistence um
I think we all appreciate that uh just
for the purpose of clarification several
times you mentioned the fact that you
know there's sometimes we're being held
to 2008 sometimes we're being held to
2008 or 19 or whatever it was I just
want to make sure I'm understanding
correctly it wasn't our choosing that we
wanted to go with 2008 we just wanted to
to be consistent one way or the other is
that correct correct correct and my
understanding is that Brian team is the
one that figured that out I'll let him
comment on how when that change was made
and as he mentioned we gained a little
bit with that change and we lost a
little bit with that change so was yeah
real quick not to jump in front of Brian
but uh we're held to the 2008 ordinance
because the district's property is in
the plan development that was executed
uh with the developer and York County
back in 2008 that's that's why we're
being held to those standards which is
both helpful and hurtful in some ways
and the Tia the traffic is the only one
that um that they reviewed under the
wrong ordinance so everything else has
been consistent to the 2008 I believe so
trees I'd say that except for the the
grand trees Tre that we started down the
wrong path for that but now we're
good thank you so trees helped us we had
we're only held to 32 in in diameter Bas
on 2008 versus 24 and I will say in
terms of the Branch Tre issue that's
come up lately the county has worked
with us on that they've granted
administrative approval for those bran
trees obviously we're going to be
required to do mitigation make sure
planning uh to replace that but we were
able to work through that issue without
any formal process which was grateful to
them for
that I know you guys have worked nights
and like what Ginger said you I mean
weekends and nights and Sundays and I
hope you get a day off at least for
Christmas I hope we get some things
settled because you all deserve it it's
been
crazy they can take a day off as long as
we're started building as soon as we get
we'll discuss that they
need I don't I don't want to beat this
proverbial dead horse but my question to
any of you is I'm not a developer I I'm
not that familiar with this process
other than what I've learned um through
this but you made a comment earlier Dr
Hopkins that with our fourth submittal
to the Tia that we hope to get uh that
approved and if we don't we hope to have
some real clear a real clear plan for
what they need my question is and why I
can't wrap my head around why it would
take four different submittal and and
and at this point we're still hoping
that we get a clear plan from the county
or whoever that is you know dot
apparently in in better saap of County I
I just can't I can't comprehend why we
would be at force of midds for a TIA
when I mean the the the goal poost a
little bit with the or the development
agreements that kind of thing but what
happens if we don't get this approval
and and we don't have a clear Direction
you say you hope we have clear Direction
what if we don't what if we're back to
square one how do we resolve that it
seems like so much of this is incumbent
upon us to show them why we should do
this or do that I'm just very confused
by the fact that you guys have worked
your tails off for the better part of a
year or more two years and and we're
still crossing our fingers hoping that
we get clear Direction at this point
does that make sense yeah and it is
frustrating and and you know here again
I'll just say that you know the county
is required to follow their ordinances
and mandates and the rules and there's a
process and sometimes that process can
get a little sticky and unfortunately
we've come across some stickiness in
these processes which have delayed um
not only
the resubmission and the adding of data
where appropriate um but the change in
ordinance
Etc oh I'm I'm changing this I'm forgive
me um so there are a lot of things
involved in that and I I'm not sure we
can pen it on exactly any one entity I
think you know we've got some things we
in retrospect we think we could have
done better a little more timely wish we
would have known going in um but you
know water under the bridge up until
this point indications are positive um
if we don't get approval um I'm I'm
hopeful and and somewhat confident that
we will at least have a plan to to see
an end in sight um soon enough to be
able to stay on uh schedule we know what
to put on our Christmas list so thank
you guys add that to your Christmas wish
list it's on there I promise um but you
know here again if we're stying again we
are going to have some you know going to
have to have some discussions about
timeline how that affects the opening of
the school um we're hopeful that we may
not have to get to that point um but if
that time comes we will have to have
that discussion and Brian I question I
guess for you probably the Army Corps is
that is this a typical time frame for
their for their
responses yes generally speaking I think
we're on schedule that's probably the
portion the the part that's gone um
according to schedule the most um under
the permit that we're requesting there
are prescribed conditions that we meet
all of those prescribed conditions um
it's just the process and timeline that
goes through but we feel very good about
that and the difference between a bridge
and the more expensive Culvert is it
does nothing to the water it's the same
effect that the water the water will
have the same running effect either way
correct that's one of the prescribed
conditions that we're required to meet
both from a water quality and a water
quantity of conveying that water through
our site as it was originally um as it
it originally uh moves through the site
so we do have to meet those requirements
that's part of the review that both the
state and the federal government are uh
ongoing right now thank you
other
question all right we're going to
transition right into then uh you heard
us talk about the site and the site
approval when we get site approval we
have to have a contractor who can
actually do the work to clear the site
so Dr Hopkins if you will bring us to
that contract please I'm going to go
right to just give a quick little update
on some things I know I gave a big
update last week but I just wanted to a
couple of things that are moving along
at the field house we completed all the
blasting uh that was required at the
field L for the sewer relocation um so
uh the grading and the building pad are
in queue we're still on for a summer 24
completion there tennis quarts the light
poles are up the Curbing and sidewalks
are in uh the next phase is the asphalt
for the quarts that we'll have to cure
and then the painting of that uh those
should be open in January February for
the tennis season um and then phase
three the track expansion um they're
underway they have uh done the the
Reclamation of the existing surface um
expanded the curvings in uh it's being
graded right now and um I think it
passed proof roll last week before the
rain and then the next step is asphalt
and the lighting and that and so that is
still in queue to be uh ready for track
season this spring um Dr Quinn mentioned
oh excuse me I forgot the commons Media
Center renovation that's in progress the
demolition is in progress um the
finishes are being selected I think the
the architect was getting together some
color boards for colors in those areas
and floorings so we're getting closer
there uh that's Southern Builders and
then the traffic pattern which will be
uh separating the entrances of the high
school and what will be Middle School
number three uh expanding the bus Road
adding some parking lots and some
stacking for those two schools uh that
will begin this summer um we have
started a part of that JM cope will be
widening the curve in the bus lot that's
right there adjacent to the high school
loading area so buses can pass safely
going in both directions that will be
done this year um with regard to um the
approvals that Dr Quinn asked uh one is
the site plan construction but the
second this is not a change order this
is not a new this is an expense that we
knew was coming we're just asking for
approval to go ahead and make sure that
we make this purchase and get it done
that's for the HVAC unit uh for the
cafeteria to Action Mechanical in the
amount of
$45,000 if you remember one thing that
we did we added some um some renovation
work to the kitchen itself expanding the
washroom new dishwasher and that also
coincided with the failure of the
existing air conditioner in that area so
we went ahead and replaced it so this is
approval to go ahead and make that uh
that already accounted for a purchase of
$45,000 so that is the first approval
that I'll ask of you tonight so we'll go
a and do that one and then I'll talk
about the next one all right without
objection the board will approve the hu
unit for Bethany cafeteria to I mean
cafeteria kitchen to Action Mechanical
in the amount of
4,000 hearing none uh HKC units approved
and Mr bur you asked for about how we're
doing to accommodate these maybe and
possibilities one of the things that
we're trying to do is make sure we have
everything lined up so when approvals
fall into place that we're able to hit
the ground running uh to begin moving
dirt on the site so we issued an RF Q
for um uh grading contractors um in
November um so uh these will be the
folks that actually prepare the site and
build the building pad prior to
construction actually beginning on the
building itself um we put that out in
November we got that that back last week
we received four I believe four bids uh
ranging between 20, 800,000 and
$24,600
th000 um so the low bid and that was a
company called Hoopa Grading Company who
is a big grading firm with a very strong
track record and uh actually one of
their principal people is a clover
resident and his kids go to Clover
school so they came in with a low bid of
20 million
$162,000 for the site if you remember we
talked a little bit about some
estimations that lmg had done for us the
estimate that we've gotten on the site
was just over 24 million so the good
news is we did come in under the
estimation uh but it is impactful to the
budget because it's a little more than
than we initially thought but we've got
some areas that we can address that uh
budget crunch with but as far as the
building site itself we want to be able
to get these approved so if we get that
approval for the site plan we're able to
start in January with uh shovels and
machines moving dirt at the site so that
second approval is uh the award of the
grading contract to Hoopa Grading
Company in the amount of 20,
[Music]
862,5kg none uh site construction for
the high school number two is approved
all right thank you very much I know
y'all are tired of me so I will excuse
myself thank you thank you Dr Hopkins
and Mr love I believe Finance report is
up thank you Dr G Mr chairman and
members of the board I have a very short
report tonight thank you okay I yield to
Mark the only thing I need to report to
you is that we don't have a finance
report because it's too early in the
month to have a report from the county
the tax Collections and the next thing
is want to make you aware that when we
issue tax exempt bonds if we invest
those bonds and earn more interest than
than we are paying on the interest rate
we have to go through a calculation
called Arbitrage at which we may have to
refund some of the difference to the
federal government in order to make sure
that our bonds maintain a tax exempt
Authority and rating we're in that
situation right now that the interest
rate we're earning is more than the
interest rate we're paying so we have to
go through this gation we may not have
to pay any because a a complex
calculation to go through and we also
have it audited by this company amtech
that the audit the um attorneys the bond
attorneys recommended that we Ed to
verify the calculation no no matter what
we want to make sure the bonds maintain
the tax exempt
status that's my report tonight unless
somebody has a
question thanks thank you very
much that concludes the superintendent's
report I do I have a motion to end the
business
meeting meeting
ajour